Create 051-new-ipfs-release-process.md (#266)
ipfs/blog: content/post/051-new-ipfs-release-process.md

---
date: 2019-07-18
url: 2019-07-18-ipfs-release-process
tags: IPFS, go-ipfs, release process, 
title: Improving the IPFS Release Process
author: Steven Allen, Alan Shaw, David Dias, Molly Mackinlay
---

go-ipfs is introducing a new release cycle and process to ensure reliable releases.

## Background

The past three releases have had a few critical regressions, several of which

> would have been caught by better release testing and released faster with an

Author: ```suggestion
would have been caught by better release testing, or released faster fixes with an
```

Reviewer: Hm. That's still not _quite_ correct. I've changed it to:

> several of which would have been caught by better release testing and have had fixes released faster with an improved release process.

But that's a bit of a mouthful.

Reviewer: How about:

> The past three releases have introduced a few critical regressions (since
fixed), several of which would have been caught by better release. Baring that,
a better release process would have enabled us to quickly release fixes for
these regressions.

Reviewer: Actually, I've just reworked this section.

> improved release process.

Author: ```suggestion
improved release process. At the end of Q2, we took the time to reflect and investigate these past challenges to identify specific strategies to prevent them going forward. This is what we found:
```
I think this intro needs more context and support. The reason we're diving into this background is to give clarity about why our chosen strategy should help us avoid these problems in the future.

Reviewer: (section reworked)

> * 0.4.21 had two performance regressions in bitswap:

Reviewer: Less context?

> * 0.4.21 had two performance regressions in bitswap:

Author: ```suggestion
* **go-ipfs 0.4.21** had two performance regressions in bitswap:
```

>   * a throughput regression that should have been caught by regression testing

Author: ```suggestion
  1. A throughput regression that should have been caught by regression testing
```

    (now tested) but almost certainly would have been noticed by downstream
    users given a longer release-testing process.

>   * a CPU utilization regression that only shows up with >10000 peers. Something

Author: ```suggestion
  2. A CPU utilization regression that only shows up with >10000 peers. Something
```

    that only really shows up in certain production systems under heavy load.

> * 0.4.20 had a regression where adding multiple independent files in the same

Author: ```suggestion
* **go-ipfs 0.4.20** had a regression where adding multiple independent files in the same
```

  add command didn't work ([#6254](https://github.com/ipfs/go-ipfs/pull/6255)).

>   A regression test has since been added but this _also_ would have been caught

Author: ```suggestion
  A regression test has since been added, but this _also_ would have been caught
```

  with better cross-application testing.

> * 0.4.19 had multiple regressions:

Author: ```suggestion
* **go-ipfs 0.4.19** had multiple regressions (all fixed in 0.4.20):
```
-- true that these spec regressions were fixed in the following release? otherwise it looks a little like we didn't fix those issues until 0.4.21 or 22.

Reviewer: All of these issues have since bin fixed. I'll change the intro paragraph to make that clear.

>   * a regression in the docker container (introduced by

Author: ```suggestion
  1. A regression in the docker container (introduced by
```

    [#6040](https://github.com/ipfs/go-ipfs/pull/6040)) that would have been
    caught by testing the go-ipfs docker image in more production environments.

>   * a CPU utilization regression in bitswap only seen under very high load. This

Author: ```suggestion
  2. A CPU utilization regression in bitswap only seen under very high load. This
```

    would have been caught by testing under production loads.

>   * panics in the DHT and QUIC modules that only show up under heavy load.

Author: ```suggestion
  3. Panics in the DHT and QUIC modules that only show up under heavy load.
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
While each of these regressions was caught and addressed for the subsequent release - it is a bug that they were allowed to launch at all, and worse that our release cadence caused them to continue affecting production usage until the next feature release could be shipped.

```
Feels like this needs a sentence to wrap up the findings and clarify learnings.

## Actions
  
To prevent this pattern from continuing, we've taken several actions:

1. To address the stability issues, we've introduced a new release process that
   involves extensively testing releases in a wide variety of production
   environments.
2. To address the issue of slow releases, we've introduced a 6 week release
   cycle.
3. To address the issue of slow bug fixes, we've switched to semver and
   introduced patch releases. The first patch release will be 0.4.22 and the
   next _feature_ release will be 0.5.0.
   
At the same time, we've introduced a feature release _freeze_ until we can
finish building out our testing infrastructure (a topic for another blog post).

> XXX: Should we write that one first? It's awkward to say "we're introducing a

Reviewer: ?

Author: I don't think the plan deserves a blog post at this time (maybe when fully implemented), but it **does** deserve more explanation than this. Maybe:

"....finish building out our testing infrastructure designed to evaluate IPFS and libp2p at scale - from single node performance tests to overall network health and efficiency under simulated usage conditions. This test infra should improve our confidence that every release improves upon the previous one, and empower IPFS devs to keep our builds green through tight integration with our software engineering pipeline."

Reviewer: Reworked.

new release cadence" and then just say "but we're not using it yet :p".

### Early Testers Program

The early testers program allows groups using go-ipfs in production to
self-volunteer to help with testing `go-ipfs` release candidates in development
and production environments. While we invite the _entire_ community to help test
releases, members of the early testers program participate directly and actively
in every release.

Early testers will deploy release candidates to dev and prod environments,
giving us quick feedback on any regressions or performance changes they notice.
This means we can get some quick feedback from heavy users before we cut the
official release.

This program currently includes:

- Infura
- Textile
- Pinata
- RTrade
- QRI
- Siderus

> XXX: should get signoffs to make sure publishing this list in a blog post is fine.

Reviewer: ?

Author: probably worth pining on the original invite something along the lines of "we're sending out a short announcement about the early tester program and your participation later this week - LMK if you'd prefer not to be mentioned/listed in the early testers list in that post" - I don't imagine any of them will want to opt out...

Reviewer: Y'all. Any objections to being thanked for signing up for the Early Testers program in a blog post?

- [ ] Infura (@MichaelMure)
- [ ] Textile (@sanderpick)
- [ ] Pinata (@obo20)
- [ ] RTrade (@postables)
- [ ] QRI (@b5)
- [ ] Siderus (@koalalorenzo)

Reviewer 2: No problems here!

Reviewer 3: SGTM. Thanks, @Stebalien.

Reviewer 4: delighted. Thanks!

Reviewer 5: Sounds great, thanks!

Reviewer 6: All fine by me :D

to quickly release fixes for critical regressions, should they arise. If we fix
a critical regression in a go-ipfs release, we will create a _patch_ release for
this regression based on the current stable release.

This patch release will still undergo the release testing process but we expect
it to take 2-3 days, rather than weeks:

1. Less than a day for internal testing.
2. 1-2 days for production testing by members of the early testers program.

Note: This release process _does not_ introduce long term support releases.
Patches will only be applied to the latest release and will not be backported.
Furthermore, the next feature release will likely include bug fixes not fixed in
a patch release.

#### Semver

This release process finally switches go-ipfs over to semver. Like many pre-1.0
project, go-ipfs has reserved MINOR releases for large breaking changes.
However, this means we can't distinguish between true patch releases (bug fixes
applied to the previous release) and feature releases (minor releases).

This means:

* Minor releases will no longer signal large breaking changes.
* Patch releases will now be just that: patches on the previous stable release.

> As an historical tidbit, we've also held a somewhat foolish hope that 0.5.0

Reviewer: :rose:

would mark "beta". The next feature release, 0.5.0, will _not_ be beta.

### Process

The new release process includes 5 stages:

0. Automated Testing - go-ipfs CI Passes.
1. Internal Testing - go-ipfs is tested against IPFS infrastructure and
   [Shipyard](https://github.com/ipfs-shipyard) applications.

> 2. Community Dev Testing - go-ipfs is tested by the community in dev

Reviewer: By the entire community (and by early testers but that's explained below).

   environments.
3. Community Prod Testing - go-ipfs is tested by the community in production
   environments.
4. Release - go-ipfs is released.

> If we merge any non-trivial fixes during the release process, we'll start over

Reviewer: ?

> If we merge any non-trivial fixes during the release process, we'll start over

Author: sure - this read better to me, but don't feel strongly

at stage 0 with a compressed release process for the stages that have already
been completed once.

> We expect stages 1-3 to take a week each, on average.

Reviewer: We can just say "cutting the release".

> We expect stages 1-3 to take a week each, on average.

Reviewer: Actually, this is fine.

project's infrastructure (the bootstrappers and the gateways).

This stage allows us to rapidly find, diagnose, and fix issues on hardware we
control before asking the wider community to begin testing.

#### Stage 2 - Community Dev Testing

At this stage, we announce the impending release to the community and ask for
beta testers. This stage exists to give IPFS some low-stakes testing on as many
environments as possible.

This is also the first stage where we involve members of the early testers
program. Here, we ask them to test the go-ipfs release in their _dev_
infrastructure and work with us to resolve any issues.

#### Stage 3 - Community Prod Testing

Once the go-ipfs release candidate has been thoroughly tested in dev
environments, we ask members of the early testers program to deploy the release
candidate to a subset of their production environment. This stage gives us a
chance to test on production workloads while retaining the ability to quickly
roll back changes and fix any issues that might arise before the final release.

#### Stage 4 - Release

At stage 4, we make sure all the documentation has been updated and cut the
final release.

## Communication

> We have several communication points in this process:

Reviewer: This section could flow better.

Author: I think this works well =]

* When we cut each RC, we will create an associated [GitHub
  release](https://github.com/ipfs/go-ipfs/releases). You can follow along by
  either:
  * Subscribing to the [RSS feed](https://github.com/ipfs/go-ipfs/releases.atom).
  * Subscribing to release email notifications on the go-ipfs repository.
* At stage 0, we will create an issue with a copy of the [release
  checklist](https://github.com/ipfs/go-ipfs/blob/master/docs/RELEASE_ISSUE_TEMPLATE.md).
* At stage 2, we will announce the release candidate on IRC/Matrix.
* At stage 3, we will announce the release candidate on IRC/Matrix and Twitter for a wider audience.
* At stage 4, we will continue to publish a blog post announcing the highlights in the release

> XXX: Should we have an ipfs-announce mailing list?

Reviewer: ?

Reviewer: Yes. Let's just stick with that.

## Where To Learn More

If you're interested in seeing this release process in action, we trialed the
_full_ (not patch) release process in the latest patch release (0.4.22):
[#6506](https://github.com/ipfs/go-ipfs/issues/6506).

> If you'd like to read out the official release process, you can find it in

Author: ```suggestion
If you'd like to read through the official release process, you can find it in
```

Reviewer: :upside_down_face:

[docs/releases.md](https://github.com/ipfs/go-ipfs/blob/master/docs/releases.md).

Finally, if you're using go-ipfs in production and would like to join the the
Early Testers program, please read

> [docs/EARLY_TESTERS.md](https://github.com/ipfs/go-ipfs/blob/master/docs/EARLY_TESTERS.md).

Author: ```suggestion
[docs/EARLY_TESTERS.md](https://github.com/ipfs/go-ipfs/blob/master/docs/EARLY_TESTERS.md) and submit a PR to join if interested.
```

---
date: 2019-07-18
url: 2019-07-18-ipfs-release-process
tags: IPFS, go-ipfs, release process, 
title: Improving the IPFS Release Process
author: Steven Allen, Alan Shaw, David Dias, Molly Mackinlay
---

go-ipfs is introducing a new release cycle and process to ensure reliable releases.

## Background

When reflecting on Q2, we noticed an unusual number of critical regressions

> (since fixed) introduced in the last three go-ipfs releases:

Reviewer 7: I would lead with a positive - this is a good thing because...and here's the reason why we did it.

> IPFS is growing and maturing 🌱. We're seeing many more users in our network and have recognised that we need to level up our release process to deliver a more stable product, on a predictable schedule. We're doing this because in Q2 we shipped an unusual number of critical regressions 😱. Rest assured that these have since been fixed 😅. However, we don't want that to happen again, so we're putting safeguards in place to minimise the chances.
>
> Full disclosure - here's what happened:

Reviewer: Updated minus the emojies (for consistency). Thanks!

* **go-ipfs 0.4.21** had two performance regressions in bitswap:
  1. A throughput regression that should have been caught by regression testing
    (now tested) but almost certainly would have been noticed by downstream
    users given a longer release-testing process.
  2. A CPU utilization regression that only shows up with >10000 peers. Something
    that only really shows up in certain production systems under heavy load.
* **go-ipfs 0.4.20** had a regression where adding multiple independent files in the same
  add command didn't work ([#6254](https://github.com/ipfs/go-ipfs/pull/6255)).
  A regression test has since been added, but this _also_ would have been caught
  with better cross-application testing.

> * **go-ipfs 0.4.19** had multiple regressions (all fixed in 0.4.20):

Reviewer 7: We already said we fixed all of these...

```suggestion
* **go-ipfs 0.4.19** had multiple regressions:
```

  1. A regression in the docker container (introduced by
    [#6040](https://github.com/ipfs/go-ipfs/pull/6040)) that would have been
    caught by testing the go-ipfs docker image in more production environments.
  2. A CPU utilization regression in bitswap only seen under very high load. This
    would have been caught by testing under production loads.

>   3. Panics in the DHT and QUIC modules that only show up under heavy load.

Reviewer 7: Do you think this should be chronological? IMHO it feels wrong to read this from newest to oldest.

Reviewer 7: [`0.4.19` was built 1st March](https://dist.ipfs.io/go-ipfs/v0.4.19/build-info) so is technically not Q2. Perhaps we should say we were reflecting on Q1 **and** Q2?

That would actually help because it would mean our proposal for 6 week release cycle would actually be faster than if these 3 were all released in one quarter! 😂

Reviewer: I'll change it to "reflecting on this year so far".

We found two root causes:

1. An uptick in development pace with respect to previous quarters without
   matching improvements to our testing practices. Several large refactors
   touching key but poorly tested subsystems landed this year.
2. A significant increase in the network size and production demands on go-ipfs

>    without _any_ large-scale testing or network simulation infrastructure. In

Author: ```suggestion
   without large-scale testing or network simulation infrastructure. In
```

   the past all production scale testing has been done by deploying a custom
   go-ipfs build to a bootstrapper or gateway and watching how it behaves.
   

> To address these concerns, we've put a halt to all non-bugfix go-ipfs releases

Author: ```suggestion
To address these concerns, we've paused all non-bugfix go-ipfs releases
```

To address these concerns, we've put a halt to all non-bugfix go-ipfs releases
as we improve our testing practices and build out our testing and network
simulation infrastructure. We felt this measure necessary as testing tends to

> become a secondary concern in the face new features and pressing performance

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
become a secondary concern in the face of new features and pressing performance
```

> issues.

Author: ```suggestion
improvements.
```

issues.

However, even with our current testing practices, these regressions should have

> been caught by pre-release testing. Furthermore, a better release process (e.g.,

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
been caught by pre-release testing. Furthermore, a better release process (e.g.
```

the ability to cut patch releases) would have enabled us to quickly release

> fixes for these regressions.

Reviewer 7: This is also about communicating and managing expectations that the communty can have about a release, without expecting them to have read a blog post about it. With semver the community can (relatively) safely assume that they can upgrade to a patch version without it breaking any of their code.

It gives us the flexibility to release patches without the fanfare of a major release and will probably encourage more users to upgrade sooner knowing that upgrading will be easy.

Reviewer: LGTY?

Therefore, in addition to improving our testing, we're introducing a new release
process to ensure that releases have been tested in as many environments as we

> can and that we can quickly release bug fixes without waiting an entire release

Author: ```suggestion
can, and that we can quickly release bug fixes without waiting an entire release
```

can and that we can quickly release bug fixes without waiting an entire release
cycle.

> ## Release Process

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
## Release Process Changes
```

  
We've made three specific changes to the release process:

1. To address the stability issues, we've introduced a new release process that
   involves extensively testing releases in a wide variety of production
   environments.
2. To address the issue of slow releases, we've introduced a 6 week release
   cycle.
3. To address the issue of slow bug fixes, we've switched to semver and
   introduced patch releases. The first patch release will be 0.4.22 and the
   next _feature_ release will be 0.5.0.
   
### Early Testers Program

> The early testers program allows groups using go-ipfs in production to

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
We're introducing an early testers program that allows groups using go-ipfs in production to
```

self-volunteer to help with testing `go-ipfs` release candidates in development
and production environments. While we invite the _entire_ community to help test
releases, members of the early testers program participate directly and actively
in every release.

Early testers will deploy release candidates to dev and prod environments,
giving us quick feedback on any regressions or performance changes they notice.
This means we can get some quick feedback from heavy users before we cut the

> official release.

Reviewer 7: What do they get out of it? We need to encourage more people to sign up and keep the existing ones!

```suggestion
official release.

Early testers get access to new features and performance improvements before the general public. This gives early testers more time to integrate new releases with their systems and an advantage over their competitors whilst also being a huge help to the greater IPFS community.
```

Reviewer: Anyone can test... It's mostly that they get to work with us in a tight loop to debug any issues in the release candidate before the final release. I'll add a note on that.

Reviewer: Fixed, I think?

This program currently includes:

- Infura
- Textile
- Pinata
- RTrade
- QRI

> - Siderus

Reviewer 7: We should at least link to their websites. People might read this and wonder what these awesome companies are doing with IPFS.

Reviewer: Done!

then run through the release process in an expected 3 weeks.

If the release process runs under or over the expected 3 weeks, the next release
will aim to branch at the 6 week mark, regardless. That way, even if we don't
release on schedule, we can still maintain a 6 week release cadence.

#### Patch Releases

Given the increased structure and extensive testing in this release process, we need a way
to quickly release fixes for critical regressions, should they arise. If we fix
a critical regression in a go-ipfs release, we will create a _patch_ release for
this regression based on the current stable release.

This patch release will still undergo an abbreviated release testing process, but we expect
it to take 2-3 days, rather than weeks:

1. Less than a day for internal testing.
2. 1-2 days for production testing by members of the early testers program.

Note: This release process _does not_ introduce long term support releases.
Patches will only be applied to the latest release and will not be backported.
Furthermore, the next feature release will likely include additional bug fixes not deemed critical to fix in
a patch release.

#### Semver

> This release process finally switches go-ipfs over to semver. Like many pre-1.0

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
This release process finally switches go-ipfs over to [semver](https://semver.org/). Like many pre-1.0
```

project, go-ipfs has reserved MINOR releases for large breaking changes.
However, this means we can't distinguish between true patch releases (bug fixes
applied to the previous release) and feature releases (minor releases).

> This means:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
This means that until go-ipfs reaches 1.0:
```

> * Minor releases will no longer signal large breaking changes.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Minor releases will signal large breaking changes.
* Patch releases will no longer signal large breaking changes.
```

Reviewer: This section was correct. We were using minor releases to indicate large changes that often required network upgrades.

Reviewer 7: Ah gotcha - I’ve never seen a minor release change so I assumed it was a typo!

Author: "no longer signal large breaking changes, but just regular new features and protocol improvements"?

Reviewer: Hm. I guess that may have only been 0.4.0? I've clarified this section a bit.

* Patch releases will now be just that: patches on the previous stable release.

> As an historical tidbit, we've also held a somewhat romantic hope that 0.5.0

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
As an historical tidbit, we held a somewhat romantic hope that 0.5.0
```

---

> date: 2019-07-18

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2019-08-14
```
@Stebalien - LG?

> url: 2019-07-18-ipfs-release-process

Author: ```suggestion
url: 2019-08-14-ipfs-release-process
```
